Source extractor tutorial (#6265)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/imaging/tutorials/astronomy-source-extractor/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Source extractor on DESI Legacy Surveys sky images
questions:
  - How do I detect luminous sources from a dark background?
  - What are the required inputs and their formats?
  - How can I easily get sky images?
  - How can detections be improved?
  - How can I use the extracted source properties?
  - How can I get the seed image needed for the Voronoi segmentation (TODO link to tutorial)?
objectives:
  - How to perform luminous source extraction in Galaxy.
  - How to acquire sky images in Galaxy. 
  - How to create a simple mask. 

>   - How to draw ellipses for the detected sources. 

Reviewer: Isn't this more about visualization?
```suggestion
  - How to visualize the detected sources. 
```

**Image:** 
- Preferrably: light sources on a dark background.
- Format: a single-channel 2D array stored as ```.tiff``` or ```.fits```. 

**Mask (Optional):** 
- Masks regions affected by bright sources (e.g. stars) to improve background estimation. 
- Pixels with
``` python
value > maskthresh
```
or boolean ```True``` are masked.
- Format: a single-channel 2D array stored as ```.tiff``` or ```.fits```.  

**Filter Kernel (Optional):** 
The filter kernel is used to smooth the input image, which can enhance the detection of faint and extended sources. However, in crowded fields, filtering may reduce performance by blending nearby objects.

- If ```Filter Case``` is set to ```none```, no filtering is applied.
- If ```Filter Case``` is ```default```, a built-in smoothing kernel is used:
```markdown
1 2 1
2 4 2
1 2 1
```
- If ```Filter Case``` is ```file```, you must provide a custom 2D array stored as plain text ```.txt``` file. The file should contain whitespace-separated values and must be readable with:
```python
import numpy as np
kernel = np.loadtxt("filter.txt")

> ```

Reviewer 2: so up to this point one needs to do the preprocessing locally? And then move to Galaxy?

Reviewer 2: Still not clear to me where this happens

>
> ``` RGB = false (1) ```
> ``` Interleaved = false ```
> ``` SizeZ = 1 ```
> ``` SizeT = 1 ```
> ``` SizeC = 1 ```
>
> Tip 2: Use {% tool [astropy fitsinfo](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/astroteam/astropy_fitsinfo/astropy_fitsinfo/0.2.0+galaxy2) %} to check ```.fits``` metadata. Required:
> ```Dimensions (N, M) ```, where ```N``` and ```M``` are pixel dimensions in 2D. 
{: .comment}

## Getting data from DESI Legacy Surveys
> <hands-on-title> Data Acquisition </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial. You can rename the default unnamed history.
> 
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_create_new.md %}
> 
> 2. Run the {% tool [DESI Legacy Survey](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/astroteam/desi_legacy_survey_astro_tool/desi_legacy_survey_astro_tool/0.0.2+galaxy0) %} tool. 
> 
>    - **Important:** Choose the Data Product **Image**.
> 
>    The default values are used for this tutorial.
>    The history now contains the ```.fits``` image file that is used as input for the source-extractor tool.
{: .hands_on}

## Running the Source-Extractor Tool

> Once you’ve selected the source-extractor tool, choose the input file named: ``` DESI Legacy Survey -> Image fits ```. After the tool has finished running, several output images and data products will be available:

Reviewer 2: minor detail: this is the first time (I think) that the user is addressed as "you" instead of user. It would be good to be consistent in addressing the reader

> - The background subtracted image with detected sources highlighted by red ellipses,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The background subtracted image with detected sources highlighted by red ellipses
```

- The estiamted background

> - The background RMS (root mean square)

Reviewer 2: RMS was used before in the code and not spelled out, so I think it's better to specify above

- The segmentation map
- A catalog table listing the detected sources along with measured parameters such as flux, position, size, and shape

**Example Outputs:**
![Data and sources image](../../images/astronomy-source-extractor/source-extractor_data_sources_no_mask.png "Data and detected sources image.")

The original image is published by [Legacy Surveys / D. Lang (Perimeter Institute)](https://www.legacysurvey.org/acknowledgment/). The Legacy Surveys are described in {% cite legacy-survey-astronomy %}.

![Background image](../../images/astronomy-source-extractor/source-extractor_background_no_mask.png "Background image.")

> > <hands-on-title> Ellipse drawing </hands-on-title>

Reviewer 2: now this is back to local machine? If so, should be indicated

> The ellipses shown on the previous figure can be built using:
>    ``` python
>    from matplotlib.patches import Ellipse
>    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
>    
>    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
>    for i in range(len(objects)):
>        e = Ellipse(xy=(objects['x'][i], objects['y'][i]),
>                    width=6*objects['a'][i],
>                    height=6*objects['b'][i],
>                    angle=objects['theta'][i] * 180. / np.pi)
>        e.set_facecolor('none')
>        e.set_edgecolor('red')
>        ax.add_artist(e)
>    ```
> Here, ```objects``` is the table of detected sources returned by the tool
{: .hands_on}

## Using a Mask to Improve Source Detection

Bright stars can skew background estimation and obscure nearby faint sources. In the previous output, some central sources were missed due to bright star interference.

A simple mask can help. Here's an example:

![Mask](../../images/astronomy-source-extractor/source-extractor-mask.png "Mask.")

This mask can be easily created with:

``` python
import numpy as np
import tifffile
mask = np.zeros((360,360))
mask[270:325, :] = 1
mask[239:, :200] = 1
tifffile.imwrite("mask.tiff", mask)
```

> Upload the mask to Galaxy, select it in the source-extractor tool, and re-run.

Reviewer 2: maybe we can combine this with a notebook as part of the workflow

**Improved Outputs:**
![Data and sources image with mask](../../images/astronomy-source-extractor/source-extractor_data_sources_with_mask.png "Data and detected sources image.")

![Background image with mask](../../images/astronomy-source-extractor/source-extractor_background_with_mask.png "Background image.")

One can observe that the central sources are now detected and also the background dynamic range has decreased, due to the mask.

An important output of this tool is the segmentation map of the detected sources:
![Segmentation map with mask](../../images/astronomy-source-extractor/segmentation-map-with-mask.png "Segmentation map.")

> This map can be used as the seed image required by Voronoi segmentation (TODO put a link to this). In this case, one can observe that the two bright stars still have an important effect on the source detection, therefore better masking, using the array RMS as a relative error in thresholding or different background mesh sizes could be attempted to improve the results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This map can be used as the seed image required by the [Voronoi segmentation tutorial](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/imaging/tutorials/voronoi-segmentation/tutorial.html). In this case, one can observe that the two bright stars still have an important effect on the source detection, therefore better masking, using the array RMS as a relative error in thresholding or different background mesh sizes could be attempted to improve the results.
```

Reviewer: I think it's {% link %} like
```suggestion
This map can be used as the seed image required by the [Voronoi segmentation tutorial]({% link topics/imaging/tutorials/voronoi-segmentation/tutorial.md }). In this case, one can observe that the two bright stars still have an important effect on the source detection, therefore better masking, using the array RMS as a relative error in thresholding or different background mesh sizes could be attempted to improve the results.
```
